Somebody in the organization made a
call. And I respect that. I mean, are we
going to get these calls right every
day? There's a hundred calls we've made
to exit stuff that actually didn't end
up being successful. Uh again, do you
regret it or do you deal with what you
can control, which is what do we have
ahead of us? And I I am much more of a
philosophy, focus on what you can
control. Makes life much easier because
then you can actually look forward
rather than keep looking back.
>> I'm Francine Lacqua and this is Leaders,
the podcast that explores what drives
the world's most influential people.
This week's episode is Wael Sawan, the
chief executive of Shell. That's
Europe's [music] largest oil company. We
spoke at the end of last year, before
the US attack on Venezuela and its
capture of President Maduro and the more
recent US Israel war with Iran.
And while recent events have really
upended the global energy industry,
Sawan's time at Shell has drawn praise,
>> [music]
>> especially for his focus on controlling
costs. Now, since taking [music] over in
early 2023, Shell has outperformed its
big oil rivals.
And as a leader in a challenging and
increasingly volatile landscape, I was
keen to hear about the moment Sawan knew
he was being considered for Shell's top
job. His controversial choice to pivot
away from renewables and his advice on
how to be decisive about investment.
Wael, thank you so much for joining us.
Thank you very much, Francine. Great to
be here. What kind of leader are you?
Look, I've learned, I think, through
firstly my father to start with people.
Yeah, I remember when he retired, he
worked for 3M and he sort of said at the
time, business results are important,
but when you leave, the number of
Christmas hampers you get after you have
retired from people whose lives you've
influenced will be what actually counts.
And so I've I've always believed you
have to start with people. You're an oil
executive and I can't figure out whether
you're even maybe, you know, you get
more heat than bankers. Does that bother
you?
>> [snorts]
>> No, it doesn't because I think the the
issues we're trying to sort of work
around are really tough issues. And
positions of leadership demands a burden
of responsibility. I I don't think that
should be unexpected. What I need to be
able to do is to make sure that my
compass is clear. And so I spend quite a
bit of time in introspection and
reflection. And then it's how to
mobilize our our organization to
deliver. What what's that introspection
look like?
It starts with actually recognizing that
the world around us is moving at an
incredibly fast pace, whether it's
geopolitical changes that we see at the
moment, technological changes with AI,
climate.
And therefore, the world that we have
come from, in particular a company like
ours, very strong engineering culture in
general, we need to move from an
all-knowing culture to an all-learning
culture because the world is just
unpredictable. It's uncertain. It's not
linear. As an engineer, does it mean you
can take emotion out of it when you when
you problem solve?
I I think you can, but I don't think
that's healthy. I I think at the heart
of it, and it's one of my own
developments, when I get too strategic
about things, um good counsel from
colleagues around me has been "Great,
you're in head mode. Make sure that you
also touch into heart mode." Because I
don't think you want to divorce head and
heart even when you're making some of
these tough decisions. Well, when did
you first start being like that? Do you
remember the first memory as a child
that you already wanted to think with
mind and heart?
Um
I was the captain of our uh high school
soccer team. Um
and I remember the burden of
responsibility at that time.
Um
we lost the tournament that we were
competing for and the challenge of
lifting up a group of around 15, 16
people at the time while figuring out
how I lift my own self up. Um
I think was one of my first experiences
with leadership, but but it was
addictive. It was great and it was
depressing and it was disappointing and
but it was all all these emotions at the
same time and it was a great opportunity
then as I grew
in my life career, uh I had more and
more opportunities to test that. I
remember once being given the my first
leadership opportunity at Shell.
And this poor individual who was
reporting in to me, I tried to apply all
of the potential leadership learnings on
this one guy. That you learned to during
your MBA?
>> That I learned during my MBA, that I'd
read a lot about. And this poor
individual had to sort of succumb to all
of the uh uh leadership 101.
>> Yeah. What does that look like? Uh how
do I make sure that I am providing him
his development plan? How do I intervene
to support him on a daily basis? How do
I coach?
>> Did he say, "Well, I'm I'm okay" or was
super gentle and and he never pushed
back, but as I reflected, as I sort of
grew in my role, I'm like, "This poor
individual must have just been cursing
the moment that that he got me as a
leader." What did you learn about
yourself actually in that first
leadership role? I think I I learned
that I have natural biases, right? So, I
love to be out with people. I'm an
extrovert by nature. Um but put me into
a room on strategic issues and I can
focus a lot more on that head than than
the heart. I also learned around just
the way I drive performance at an
organization. Finding the right balance
of when do I reach in and push hard or
when do I step back and create space?
When am I more
uh the the advocate, the supporter and
when am I more
um the individual who is actually uh
catalyzing a change? But Wael, I mean,
Shell is one of the biggest energy
companies in the world. So, when do you
ever step back and and give space? I'd
say I what I've seen in the my last 3
years in the job is I've gone through
phases. The early phase was all about
really step in and stabilize the
company, really get it into the
performance discipline that I was hoping
we can get to, a leaner, fitter, much
more competitive company. We're very
clear on the strategy we want to
implement. I can now step back more and
more and actually do have time to
reflect. What are the moves we want to
make?
Go out, connect with people, be inspired
by different ideas from the ones we have
internally.
I'm finding more and more of that space,
but that's partly because we have done a
lot of the heavy lifting to be able to
get clear on where we want to go and
we've put some terrific people in place
to be able to lead their respective
businesses and functions. So, is the
secret to a good manager or being good
leader being able to to adapt to the
situation? So, know when to push and
know when to reflect.
>> Absolutely. I saw that early in my
career. I I had just successfully
concluded a leadership role in Qatar at
the time and I assumed that that
leadership posture style was going to
serve me in a different role when I was
going to to New Orleans and I was
absolutely wrong. I needed to very
quickly understand and diagnose what the
challenges were, what the opportunities
were,
what the strength of this team was and
to be able to adapt my style to be able
to help them unlock their full
potential. It's normal to have an
inkling you're being considered for a
new job, but it's hard to be sure. It
was in Qatar when he held significant
leadership roles that Sawan realized he
might be in the running for the top
[music] job at Shell. I wanted to hear
about this moment and how he
transitioned from the candidate to chief
executive. When you look at your career,
how much of a I guess game changer was
that big Qatar job?
It was a huge game changer, right? A
huge game changer. Did you understand at
the time that they were maybe testing
you to then become chief executive?
Of course, it was the sort of job that
you figured you were on a good track in
Shell.
I'll be honest with you, it took me a
while to recognize and to convince
myself that I was in line one day to
become the CEO because you know, you're
trying to do the best that you can in
the jobs that you have, but I can tell
you almost every single job that I'd
been given in Shell, I thought there
were others who were more qualified than
I was. And so, it created that knot in
my stomach going into the job. I need to
work harder. I need to do better. And
so, Qatar was one of those moments for
me. It was a difficult role because the
2, 3 weeks after I stepped into a role,
we had the safety incident where we lost
two of our colleagues.
And I struggled as a leader because it
was under my watch that we had lost
those two people,
two colleagues whose families I knew and
uh
and it it catalyzes into a different
place. It catalyzes into a space
where as a group we had to figure out,
"How do we heal and then how do we, you
know, reach to the stars?" So, when you
have a new job, be it in Qatar or then
CEO, how do you problem solve? How do
you first of all spend a bit of time
understanding what you need to fix and
then go about fixing it?
I spend a lot of time once I know I'm in
a new job, just meeting with folks both
internally and externally to be able to
just listen to perspectives. Where are
the value pools? How is Shell doing?
What can we do better? What are the
benchmarks telling us? I then like to
move into a space of actually creating
clarity of direction because I find an
organization is not at its best without
that clarity. And so, after that for me
is the next step, which is really
setting that that direction. We've done
that in the see in in my role as CEO,
but more and more we we linked it to the
purpose of what we want to do, to become
that leading integrated energy company.
>> I mean, oil companies for a lot of uh
you know, moment was were also
kind of integral to the energy
transition, right? A lot was put on oil
companies to make sure that you did your
part to become cleaner and greener. Is
that fair?
I I think it's absolutely fair that we,
along with the multiple other
stakeholders, have a role to play in the
energy transition. So, customers have a
big role to play, governments have a a
big role to play, energy producers like
ourselves have a big role to play. And
what we have found as a company is we
have to play to our competitive
strengths. So, yes, we're very strong in
oil, we're very strong in gas, we're
very strong in trading, we're very
strong in marketing. So, how do we take
that nexus of strengths that we have and
actually contribute to an energy
transition that we know is not going to
be linear, that we know is going to be
complex, and how do we become a
stabilizing factor for our customers as
they try to navigate it? You were
speaking very plainly 3 years ago, right
when you became chief executive, when
some of your rivals or competitors were
trying to say like, "Look, we're going
to be quite good. Actually, we're almost
a renewables company." Like, were you
just more honest than some of your
competitors? I think for quite some time
what we had been trying to do is maybe
speak to multiple stakeholders, and
unfortunately,
that can come across as almost being all
things to all people. I felt it was
really important to one, build our own
beliefs around the energy system, really
get clear what our role was going to be,
and then just say it for what it was,
recognizing that not everyone was going
to agree with it,
that we're always going to have also a
small group of avid supporters, and that
what was important was for those
80%, 70% in the middle to hear
our convictions,
and then most importantly, to see us
follow through on those convictions. And
so, what we wanted to do was to position
ourselves as a player that is supporting
the energy of today while looking
forward.
And it wasn't about choosing sides.
It was about finding the role that we
can uniquely play to be able to address
energy security, energy affordability,
and energy sustainability.
I think some would prefer it's either
this or that, and we felt, "No, we are
building a company that we want to be
the best performing, best returning
company, not just today, but for decades
to come, and therefore it's incumbent
upon us to be able to look at not just
the energy system of today,
but to help shape the energy system of
the future as well." Big decisions have
shaped Wael's time at Shell. Some before
he became chief executive, others on his
watch. There's a sale of the Permian
Basin [music] assets for 9.5 billion
dollars during COVID, which was seen as
a coup for the buyer, ConocoPhillips,
[music] and the earlier exit from Guyana
before it became one of the world's
hottest frontier oil plays.
Different moments, different leadership,
but both raising big questions about
long-term value. In 2019, Shell decides
to sell your basically Permian assets.
Was that a mistake?
No, it wasn't a mistake. At the time,
what we were trying to do it it was a
very different context. Um we had a
significant amount of debt. We needed to
be able to actually pay down some of
that debt to become a much healthier
company. We had tried actually before
the sale of the Permian to look at
buying and growing our Permian position.
We competed in a couple of different
processes and were not successful. So,
we were getting to the point where our
position was just not not large enough,
not material enough to be able to to to
win.
And so, what we ended up doing is we
sold indeed the Permian, and we used
some of those funds to be able to pay
down debt and continue to strengthen the
balance sheet. Today, we enjoy one of
the strongest balance sheets in the
sector as a result of many of the
choices that we have been making over
the recent years.
>> It it it could have been a great asset.
So, is your philosophy no regrets, or do
you do you sometimes think about what
could have been?
Oh, we always look back. I mean, every
single year I take to my board what we
call a
post-investment review. It's all the
good, the bad, and the ugly of where we
have invested, the choices we have made,
because it's humbling to be able to sort
of look back with the benefit of
hindsight and say,
you know, what what was what went wrong,
what went right.
Sometimes it's execution. Sometimes it's
our view of the strategic lens that we
looked at the world through.
Um but it's important to continue to
look at that, not to regret it, but much
more to learn from it as we look to then
build the muscle for the future. Yeah,
it taught me about Guyana. It could have
been one of the most important assets,
right, for Shell? Regrets there?
Look, again, I mean, we we empower
people in the organization to be able to
meet budgetary requirements. We just had
a couple of wells that hadn't succeeded.
Somebody in the organization made a
call,
and I respect that. I mean, are we going
to get these calls right every day?
There's a hundred calls we've made to
exit stuff that actually didn't end up
being successful. Um again, do you
regret it, or do you deal with what you
can control, which is what do we have
ahead of us? And I I am much more of a
philosophy, focus on what you can
control, makes life much easier, because
then you can actually look forward
rather than keep looking back.
>> Okay, so what can you control now? What
you can control is becoming that leaner,
fitter, most competitive company. Make
sure that you continue to build
resilience.
Get that balance sheet in a very strong
position, get your businesses delivering
cash, and making sure that you are
ready, because the world around us is
uncertain. We need to be able to
actually have the strength to go through
the cycles and to generate value and
grow through the cycles. That's what we
can control. But well, is bigger better?
I know again you know, rumors of
combination between Shell and BP keep on
swirling and they've been doing so for
years. Conceptually, would something as
big as that make sense?
I I don't start from a position that
bigger is better. Undoubtedly, there are
parts of our business where scale
matters, right? Because scale allows you
to be able to be competitive, you can
spread your resources in some of the
areas where you can unlock a bit more
value. Um but scale for the sake of
scale is is mistaken. Some of the
largest M&A deals are the least
successful M&A deals because they are
massively complex. So, I start more from
a place of focus on what your strengths
are. If you're ever going to do M&A,
firstly, set a very high bar, make sure
that you can create value from it, and
then if you transact, put all of your
effort into making sure that it delivers
value. But do it for the right reasons.
Don't do it because of FOMO, don't do it
because you want to be bigger, do it
because it creates value for your
shareholders longer term. We've seen
loads of M&A in banking actually fail
because the DNA of the culture was
different, because the teams didn't work
together, be at risk-taking or something
like that. Is it the same for oil
companies? Absolutely. I think DNA does
matter, culture does matter. And again,
it depends on the scale of the the
aggregation of the companies, but if
it's two big companies coming together,
I would say culture is one of the
biggest things you need to be able to
look at. What do you say the culture of
Shell is like? So, I think our strength
has always been the the nature of the
company is high values. That's one of
the reasons I joined Shell. It's it's a
company that focuses on respect, on
integrity. We're trying to evolve the
culture further. We want to have more
edge in our performance focus. We want
to look at leveraging more of the
different parts of Shell to unlock
value. We call it one Shell, how we are
able to truly come together as an
organization. So, there are elements
that play into that. I'd say at the
heart of the cultural shift that we're
trying to make is the point I made
earlier around going from an all knower
to an all learner.
Because of our engineering culture, we
like to solve for discrete outcomes.
And that's what we built, and it's been
successful for us for decades, over a
century.
And as we go into the energy transition,
as we go into the world that we're going
into, also with the advent of of AI and
how you leverage AI and what we do with
some of the challenges we see on the
geopolitical level,
we have a an opportunity to be able to
have the humility to actually step back
and reflect, how do we change? How do we
challenge the paradigms we have had in
the past, and how do we come up with new
ways of being able to steward the
company?
>> But if you look at the numbers of how
much energy we need also to just face
the data centers and AI usage, I mean,
the numbers are so big, it's almost
difficult to get your head around it. Do
you have to be a predictor of that, or
do you do you have to foresee the
future, or do you need to just react in
a way that's in your control? I think
you have to have a clear view of the
energy system, and I would agree with
you, Francine. I think at the end of the
day, we see that primary energy
demand is going to continue to grow for
quite some time. By a lot. By a lot.
Right? It is and it's been happening. I
mean, people talk about energy
transition. Of course, what we have been
seeing is energy addition. We are at
peak oil demand, peak coal demand, peak
gas demand, peak renewables demand, peak
bio demand.
all forms of energy for many of the
reasons that you talked about. So, while
we cannot predict the future, what we
can do is sort of really make some very
clear, deterministic bets on the future.
One is gas for us, for example.
You know, we see gas as being a
stabilizing force in energy systems that
continue to transform.
That allows us to be able to say, "Okay,
we are one of the biggest, we are the
largest international player in LNG,
then make sure that you continue to play
that
with lower and lower methane emissions,
but really be there to give our
customers that versatile, reliable fuel
that they seek." Wael, what's your North
Star? So, if you look at your day, how
much is it is it meetings, you know,
that or things that you need to deal
with that you could have or that you
want to preempt, and how much of it is
actually firefighting? The
ratio I would say has swung more and
more to actually controlling my own
agenda. When you start, you're still
learning, you're sort of responding to
different stimuli, and now I've had the
opportunity to actually shape that.
Um
uh my coach has sort of uh told me
the most important thing you should be
doing is is to be purposeful. By the
way, some of that day is spent having
dinner with the kids and my wife. Be
purposeful and be present in that
moment. And other parts of the day
are about self, exercise, gym,
or, of course,
at work, really be purposeful. In this
meeting, are we trying to open up
people's minds to what's possible? In
that meeting, are we trying to address a
particular challenge that needs a
decisiveness in the moment?
Really just being choiceful and
purposeful in the way that one conducts
himself. I I think
if I can get to that level of
sophistication,
then I will feel that the day that I'm
spending is worth every minute that I'm
spending.
>> Does that have to be in everything you
do? So, as as well the dad and well the
CEO? I think in positions like this, it
is even more important to be conscious
of that of that purposefulness because
it is so easy. You can come back home
and your mind's still distracted and
thinking about work
and trying to be there having dinner but
really sort of your mind's not not
there. You have to be able to actually
create the space and the time
to be there, to be present. And and it's
one of the things I continue to work on
as leader. Do your kids talk to you
about climate change? Do they push back?
They do. Um actually it's more from a
position of curiosity. They hear
different perspectives and they say, "I
think I trust you. I'm going to I'm
going to get your perspective on it."
So, we end up talking about it. We talk
about politics. We talk about life. We
talk about leadership. And they've
gotten to an age now where they have a
lot more curiosity
about some of these things. And and
sometimes the studies sort of end up
giving a singular perspective.
They're keen to be able to understand
the broader perspectives. Do you think
Shell will be radically different in 5
years or significantly different?
Um I I think the this the pace at which
the energy system is changing means that
we will need to continue to evolve. I
don't think
one should expect a wholesale change of
what we do today. I think hydrocarbons
will continue to be a big part of what
our business is. How we prosecute our
our business, um
I think will change significantly. In
particular, we see AI just starting to
influence every part of how we work. We
have evolved as a company over 135 years
and so it's it's not unexpected to see
us evolve in the next 5 years and in the
next 20 years and hopefully we'll be
here for at least another 100 plus. What
do you want your legacy to be?
When I was recruited into this position
in the final interview with the board, I
said one of the biggest things I hope to
be able to leave behind whenever I move
on is an organization
that is better than what what I left
what that what what I inherited. And the
biggest thing for me has been the
people.
I do think being able to develop the
next cadre of leaders in Shell
is one of the things that both excites
me the most and I I feel most urgently I
need to be able to achieve. And the
reason I say that,
what I love about this company is it is
an institution. We are all replaceable.
That the institution and its values
outlive you. How difficult is it to
groom your possible replacement? I'm
spoiled in a company like Shell given
the talent base we have.
Uh we have brilliant people. So, for us,
we have very very deep um succession
planning. We have very deep talent
program. So, it allows us to know some
of our emerging talent in year five of
their tenure even if they're in their
early 30s to be able to allow us to see
who might one day get to the top table
and what are the experiences we need to
give them to be able to get there and
what are the leadership opportunities we
need to expose them to. The biggest
thing you can do for an institution like
this is make sure that you make it
stronger when you leave it. If I can do
that in my tenure, I'll be a very happy
man.
Well, how do you recharge?
Exercise. Do uh gym when I get back from
work and I try to make it consistent. Is
it difficult to switch off?
Uh not difficult to switch off. I find
myself in the right headspace when I
need to switch off and I force myself to
do so. Good sleep is key. If you had to
write a book today, what would it be on?
Uh leadership. I think it would be on
just learnings, failings, challenges and
uh and what I took away from it. Well,
thank you so much for your time today.
Pleasure. Thank you very much for having
me, Francine.
It flew by. That was 30 minutes.
Perfect.